---
title: Advice for Recursers
date: 2016-05-24
layout: post
tags: rc
---

Now's the part where I give advice for new Recursers. A lot of it echoes the
advice you've likely already heard, but that's okay. Sometimes you hear things
more often because they carry some truth in them, and hearing them even more can
help them stick (not always on either counts). Some of this is straight out of
the manual. It's all just my opinions, though, and is in no way meant to
disparage folks who did other things, even things that directly contradict this
advice. Everyone does it differently, YMMV, we are all different, like a
snowflake. or a little baby.

<hr>

- **Don't spend your time on books or MOOCS or courses that you could do at other times.**

This is just my opinion, but those resources will be there before and after
your batch; your cohort will not be there (at least not _there_ in the physical
space sense, most likely). If you really feel strongly about something, definitely do
it! Or if you feel that a reading group or structured work with other people
could greatly benefit you, then do that! But I would tell you that I think that
probably it's not the best use of your batch time to hole up in a room with a
textbook or do a series of tutorials.  Exceptions being, like I said:
book/study clubs, or groups working on the same types of things together.

- **Pair, pair, pair, pair, pair, pair, pair.**

Everyone says this. Everyone says they wish they'd paired more. Pair often, on
small things, for small amounts of time, or big things, for long times, if
you're really into it.  Don't be afraid to pair on a language you don't know
well or on a problem space you're unfamiliar with. Your cohort is and will
long remain an amazing resource, use it! Also, know when to stop! When  you
agree to pair on something, you might realize quickly after you've begun that
you're not all that interested in it after all. That's ok too! And if you legit
don't feel like pairing at all, that is also alright! That might sound
contradictory, maybe it is contradictory, but `¯\_(ツ)_/¯`. Just be open to
pairing on things you may not have thought about working on before, is all I'm
saying!

- **Regardless of what you're working on, start where you're at.**

There were people in my batch implementing programming languages. There were
other people (like me!) who barely knew anything at all. Start where you're at,
and if you don't know where you're at, ask someone to help you figure it out. I
think this is one of the most valuable things the facilitators and more
experienced Recursers can do in a batch, actually, just to give more context
and direction.

Recently, I've been wanting to learn math, and specifically statistics, which I
think would be helpful to understand at least the rudiments of. I asked my
friend Yuri (who is a statistician by training) for a book recommendation. He
gave me
[this](http://www.amazon.com/Statistical-Theory-Fourth-Chapman-Science/dp/0412041812).
I decided that I was going to read it until I didn't understand something and
then learn that thing before moving on.

>I think of this as "recursive autodidacticism" and it's a good way to figure
>out how to get where you want to go!

I opened the stats book, the first sentence in the first page of the
introduction said "A thorough understanding of calculus is required to grasp
this material". So, I shut the book, set it aside, and bought a calculus book.

I opened the calculus book and the first sentence said "You should understand
Algebra, Trigonometry, and Geometry before tackling calculus". So... I shut that book
and put it aside, too, and bought an Algebra book.

I opened the Algebra book and the first sentence of _that_ book said "This is
the number line." I thought, ok *that* I can _definitely_ do.

I haven't taken a math class since high school, I was a music and literature
major in undergrad. I'm not excited about my lack of math understanding, but
I'm not ashamed of it, either. If I tried to learn stats in a vacuum I would
_fail_; being honest with myself about what I really know and where I need to
start is _important_. I'm a 33 year old professional programmer, and I'm
currently learning college level algebra. Start where you're at.

- **Employ day to day, as much as you are able, the [Rodeo Clown Theory of
  Personal
  Development](http://blog.zdsmith.com/the-rodeo-clown-theory-of-personal-development.html)**

This is just a straight up reblog, because I love this post. thanks Zach, and
write more.

I do struggle with this; I'm an all or nothing kind of fellow. "Either," I
think "work all the time until the thing is done, or" (I cluck disdainfully at
myself) "don't do it at all." Sometimes, this attitude is a super power... when
I really get into something, I can maintain focus for weeks on end. But other
times, it is _not at all_ a superpower. Holding myself to a standard like that
is not only unrealistic, it also has the potential to be unhealthy. Figuring
out the difference between superpower hard headedness and kryptonite hard
headedness is a process; I'd like to think I'm getting better at it.

Point being, improvement is by definition incremental. Don't fight
that! Find the time to rejoice in small victories, sometimes tiny victories.
Maybe you'll have a day where the only thing you learn is a flag on a command
line tool like `ls -l` or something. That may not seem like a big deal- but
that's now a thing you know that you'll likely never need to look up again, and
that _is_ a big deal! you learned a thing! Go have a beer/chocalate
bar/apple/bag of kale chips or something!

- **Keep a devlog.**

This could be a blog! If you keep a blog- pick a thing and just use it. It can
be a tumblr, or a blogspot, or a static site generator like jekyll or middleman
or pelican or whatever... it doesn't matter, and you can always port it later.
Also, you don't have to make it a whole big public blog thing! But, at least
keep a single text file in your home directory and jot down notes about what
you did, what you learned, what you thought about...  or make it a habit to
write [ verbose git commit messages ](http://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/).
Trust me, that perspective will be hellah interesting in a few years, even if
it is just recorded in procedural sentence fragments!

- **Try to enjoy the time**

Try to stay in the moment here folks, it's only a few weeks, after all. If
you're there, you probably like to program, right? That is literally your only
responsibility during your batch- program whatever you want! It's a unique
period, try not to overthink it.

<hr>

I have other pieces of advice rattling around up there, but these are the main
highlights. I hope somebody finds them helpful.
